Data Visualization
Yahya Rashwan
Mechatronics engineering student 
How can we communicate with others using visually appealing charts?

Contents
 Data Analytics process

 Types of data in statistics
	- Quantitative and Qualitative data 

 Data Visualization : a brief introduction
	- Why do we need to use data visualization?
	- How can we use data visualization ?

 Examples of charts used in data visualization

 Notes when dealing with data visualization charts
	- Characteristics of a good data visualization
	- How can the charts be misleading?


Data Analytics process

Data analysis is a process of inspecting, cleaning, transforming, and modelling data with the goal of discovering useful information, informing conclusions, and supporting decision-making.
What is Data Analysis?

Data Analytics steps
Step One: Ask The Right Questions.

2. Step Two: Data Collection. 

3. Step Three: Data Cleaning. 

4. Step Four: Analyzing The Data. 

5. Step Five: Interpreting The Results
 

Types of data in Statistics

 Refers to information about quantities of things .
 deals with Numerical Data only.
 Can be divided to two smaller subsets (Discrete and continuous data)

Quantitative Data

 Discrete data can take only certain values and can’t be more precise (Only particular values). 

Examples : Number of students in a class, size of pair of shoes, number of wins in a season. 

 Continuous data can take any value usually within certain limits and can be divided into finer and finer parts. 

	Examples :  Weights, Heights, and temperatures.

Qualitative (Categorical) Data
 Are observed data that are placed into categories.

Qualitative data is non-numeric information.

Can be divided to two smaller subsets (Nominal, Ordinal and Binary data)


Data Visualization

It’s the graphic representation of data. 
Effective way of communication when the data is numerical. 
Can be considered as a branch of descriptive statistics. 
What is data visualization? 


To analyze and reason about data and evidence.
 Helps in the decision-making process.
 makes complex data accessible, understandable, and reasonable.
 Communicates information clearly and effectively to users.
 Plays an important role in the storytelling with data.
Why data visualization is important ? 

Where do we see data visualization?
Business (Market Analysis)

 Scientific research (Displaying results and findings)

 Healthcare (vital signs tracking)

 Navigation (Google Maps)

 Sports (Performance Analysis)

 News (Election's results visualization)



Heart pulse rate monitor

COVID-19 cases tracker


Last US elections demographic map

N’golo Kante heat map against Real Madrid in UCL 20/21 

 Comparisons
 Proportions 
 Patterns
 Relationships
 Distribution 
 Part-to-a-whole 
 How things work 
 Analyzing text
Functions of data visualization charts

Examples of charts used in data visualization


 A way of summarizing a set of categorical data.
used to compare things between different groups or to track changes over time.
 Can be seen in many ways like : 
 Multi-set bar chart
 Radial bar chart 
 Stacked bar chart 
 Population chart
Bar chart 

Radial bar chart
Multi-set bar chart 
Population pyramid
Stacked bar chart

used to track changes over short and long periods of time. 
 This is the most basic type of chart used in finance.
  Can be seen in many ways like : 
 Area graph
 Stacked area graph 

Line chart

Can you spot the differences between the two graphs ? The data is the same for both graphs
Area chart 
Simple line chart


  is a circular statistical graphic, which is divided into slices to illustrate numerical proportion.
  very widely used in the business world and the mass media.
 Can be seen in many ways like:
 Dount chart
Pie chart

Dount Chart
Simple pie chart

 uses dots to represent values for two different numeric variables.

 Scatter plots are used to observe relationships between variables.

A correlation could be:
 positive, meaning both variables move in the same direction
negative, meaning that when one variable's value increases, the other variables' values decrease.

Scatter plot


A Bubble Chart is a multi-variable graph that is a cross between a Scatterplot and a Proportional Area Chart.
 Bubble Charts are typically used to compare and show the relationships between categorized circles.
Bubble chart 


  a way to visualize multivariate data.  
 They are used to plot one or more groups of values over multiple common variables. 
 used when you want to display data across several unique dimensions
Radar Plot 

is a graphical representation of data where values are depicted by color. 
Heat maps make it easy to visualize complex data and understand it immediately.
 Can be used for tracking people and analyzing their shopping behavior.
Heat Map

is a type of diagram that represents a workflow or process. 
 They are widely used in multiple fields to document, study, plan, improve and communicate often complex processes in clear, easy-to-understand diagrams.
Flow chart 

Word Clouds are visual representations of words that give greater prominence to words that appear more frequently.
 Can be used in Natural Language processing (NLP) applications.
Word Cloud 

Map visualization is used to analyze and display the geographically related data and present it in the form of maps. 
This kind of data expression is clearer and more intuitive. We can visually see the distribution or proportion of data in each region 
Maps 



How can the data visualization mislead you?

Bad data visualization

Good data visualization
1. Same data , Different Y-axis

2. Choosing the wrong graph

3. Too complicated to understand

4. Overloading the graph with data 

5. Not clear information



